---
layout: default
title: resume
title:  "Resume: Sanjoy Das"
---

<header class="post-header">
  <h1 class="post-title">Sanjoy Das</h1>
</header>

&#115;&#097;&#110;&#106;&#111;&#121;&#064;&#112;&#108;&#097;&#121;&#105;&#110;&#103;&#119;&#105;&#116;&#104;&#112;&#111;&#105;&#110;&#116;&#101;&#114;&#115;&#046;&#099;&#111;&#109;; <https://linkedin.com/in/sanjoydas>; Sunnyvale, CA.

# Work History

**Software Engineer, Google, May 2017 - Present**

Software Engineer.

**Software Engineer, Azul Systems, Sep 2013 - May 2017**

At Azul Systems I worked on building Falcon[^falcon], a high
performance LLVM-based JIT compiler for Java.  Over the course of the
project we made significant changes to LLVM to better support managed
languages -- at a high level, we added support for precise compacting
garbage collection, deoptimization, and improved LLVM's mid-level
optimizer to better optimize Java. Most of our work lives on LLVM
upstream, and we presented talks summarizing our progress in the
2014[^talk2014] and 2015[^talk2015] LLVM Developer Meetings.

[^falcon]: <https://www.azul.com/press_release/falcon-jit-compiler/>

[^talk2014]: <http://llvm.org/devmtg/2014-10/#talk4>

[^talk2015]: <http://llvm.org/devmtg/2015-10/#talk14>


**Contributor, LLVM, Oct 2014 - Present**

I'm heavily involved[^commits] with the LLVM community, mostly
focusing on improving the mid-level optimizer and support for managed
languages.  I'm currently the code owner for the Scalar Evolution and
Induction Variable Simplification passes.  I regularly review code and
participate in design discussions.

[^commits]: LLVM commit history: <https://github.com/llvm-mirror/llvm/commits/master?author=sanjoy>

**Software Engineering Intern, Google, May 2012 - July 2012**

As an intern, I worked on the V8 Javascript engine.  My project was to
move some of the more time consuming phases of V8's optimizing JIT,
Crankshaft, onto a second thread.  The project was a success, and by
the end of the internship I had this feature implemented and checked
in under an off by default flag[^v8work] (which was enabled by default
sometime in mid 2013).

[^v8work]: v8/bleeding_edge@r12148 <https://git.io/vr5vU>


# Skills

The main focus of my professional history has been compilers and
virtual machines.  In general, I look forward to tackling hard
technical challenges that demand creativity and precision.

# Education

**2008-2013**

Bachelor of Science, Master of Science; Mathematics & Computing;

Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, India.

--
