Where did everything go?

I used to maintain a Wordpress [1] powered blog at this domain to
which I would post, on an average, two blog entries a month.  As is
very well apparent, that has now been replaced by an ultra-minimalist
statically generated website.

My earlier blog was around for almost my whole college life (2009 to
2013) before I shut it down.  Over these years I noticed my posts
getting more fragmented, haphazard and generally out-of-sync with each
other.  While slightly distressing, this wasn't unexpected; I was
(am?)  at an age where personal views change rapidly and perspectives
are in flux.

Since my thoughts now feel more mature and consistent, I think this is
a good time to reboot my website.  Specifically, I wish to move away
from fickle-minded one-off blog posts to better thought-out, deeper
articles.  I don't intend to install any form of commenting system --
I'm always available for discussion on email.

Wordpress is a fantastic piece of software if you're looking to host a
proper blog with the usual bells and whistles, but for websites like
this, I think clayoven [2] or something similar is really the best
solution.

I have started versioning [3] my website.  In a way, this puts it in
the same category as my software projects and I will treat it as such,
meaning I will go back and edit articles written in the past when I
see room for improvement.  I used to hesitate doing this earlier since
I had convinced myself that going back and editing a post was like
taking back what I said.  With a publicly visible history this is no
longer an issue.

[1]: http://wordpress.com/
[2]: https://github.com/artagnon/clayoven
[3]: https://github.com/sanjoy/playingwithpointers.com
