Running Barefoot

A quick Google search will present you with links discussing topics
ranging from the benefits of running without bulky footwear to why
shoeless running is just a passing fad.  This topic even has a
dedicated website [1].  Despite being a completely amateur runner, I
figured adding my personal data-point to the corpus of information
that is already out there couldn't hurt.

I used to wear a "Reebok United Runner III LP" [2] till a few months
back and used to experience regular shin splints and calf-pain (likely
due to overpronation), which I blamed on my supposedly flat feet.
This was until I tried running barefoot -- after a few days of
shoeless running _all_ of my leg problems magically disappeared and I
found myself physically limited only by the efficiency of my
cardiovascular system.  I noticed some very mild pain in my ankle
region the next day, not different from what I feel in a muscle after
exercising it in gym.

During my college days I had the luxury of running barefoot,
literally, on clean, grassy ground.  Managing this in a city is a
little difficult, so I use the cheapest pair of slippers money can buy
(like [3], but way cheaper).  They offer no "cushioning" to my sole,
don't hinder my ankle's motion and provide just enough protection that
I don't cut myself on a sharp stone or a piece of glass.

Please don't misunderstand the purpose of this post: if you are a
seasoned runner who knows what he/she is doing, please wear shoes or
boots or crocs or whatever; I'm certainly not capable of advising you
on the choice of your footwear.  However, if you've just begun running
and are experiencing calf pain or shin splints I suggest you give
running barefoot (or slipper-foot running, as I now do) a serious try.

[1]: http://barefootrunning.com/
[2]: http://www.flipkart.com/reebok-united-runner-iii-lp-running-shoes/p/itmdehhhj2fge6jc
[3]: http://www.jabong.com/Metro-Brown-Sandals-51825.html
